Oral Instructions of the Supreme Siddha: A Brief, Clear, and Concise Sādhana of Mañjuśrī Vādisiṃha Namo guru Vādisiṃhāya! Those gifted with intelligence, who are moved by the thought of renunciation and bodhicitta, wish to accomplish the gateways of meditative concentration and the dhāraṇī of Mañjuśrī Vādisiṃha, and possess the aim of swiftly achieving the pristine wisdom of omniscience, should correctly receive the authorization and oral instructions for this practice. They should abide by the samayas and vows, and retreat to a secluded and pleasant meditation cabin to engage in the practice. This practice has three parts: preparation, main practice, and conclusion. Preparation Visualize the objects of refuge as if truly present in the sky in front of you, with Guru Mañjughoṣa as the main refuge. In their presence, take refuge, generate bodhicitta, and meditate on the four immeasurables, as it is commonly done. Main Practice OṂ SVABHĀVA ŚUDDHĀḤ SARVADHARMĀḤ SVABHĀVA ŚUDDHO 'HAṂ Out of emptiness appears a blue, backward-twisting lion as a seat, on it a lotus and moon disc, in the center of which is the essence of the true nature of your mind in the form of a red syllable DHĪḤ. On the ground in front of it, on a lotus and moon, is the syllable HRĪḤ, deep blue in color. Light radiates from both syllables, making offerings to all noble ones and dispelling the darkness of ignorance of all beings. The light returns and is absorbed into the two syllables. From the complete transformation of the DHĪḤ, you instantly appear as Ārya Mañjuśrī, red in color, with one face and two arms. Your right hand holds aloft the blazing sword of wisdom, and the thumb and ring finger of your left hand hold at your heart the stem of an utpala. (Even though more recent manuals state that the hands are in the gesture of expounding the Dharma, the intention of the ancient root texts is exactly as it is given here. Similarly, other disagreements between the text here and these later manuals stem from the fact that the intent of the ancient text has been maintained.) Upon the flower that blooms next to your left ear is a volume of the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines. Adorned with all the silk garments and jewel ornaments, your appearance is peaceful, smiling, and charming. Most of your hair is tied up in a topknot and crowned with a blazing wish-fulfilling jewel, while the rest hangs to the left in five locks. You sit in the fully crossed vajra posture. From the BHRŪṂ at your heart appears a yellow wheel with four spokes. In its center stands an upright sword, four fingerbreadths long, with a red DHĪḤ encircled by the root mantra on its handle. From the complete transformation of the syllable HRĪḤ, the goddess Sarasvatī appears before you. She is of blue color, slightly wrathful and smiling, and displays a most charming air. Holding a sword and a book in her hands, she is adorned with all the silk garments and jewel ornaments. Her dark blue hair is tied up in a topknot crowned with a jewel, and the rest hangs down in braided tresses. She stands in a dignified posture. At her heart, on a moon disc, is a sword, four fingerbreadths long, with a blue HRĪḤ encircled by the syllables of her mantra on its handle. Light radiates from the seed syllables at the heart of both Mañjuśrī and his consort to invoke an inconceivable assembly of jñānasattvas: OM VAJRASAMĀJAḤ | JAḤ HŪṂ BAṂ HOḤ Think that they are now inseparable, and maintain the meditative concentration of the illusion-like appearance of the deity for a long time. When this becomes tiresome, practice the mantra recitation. Light radiates from the seed syllable and the mantra garland at your heart, transforming the outer world into an immeasurable mansion, and all the beings contained therein attain the state of Mañjuśrī and his consort. Then, an endless string of DHĪḤ syllables issues from the DHĪḤ at your heart. It comes out of your right nostril, enters the consort's left nostril, and is absorbed into the HRĪḤ at her heart. From there emerges, as if released, a string of HRĪḤ syllables that exits through her right nostril to enter your body through your left nostril. It transforms into the āli kāli mantra, which then fills your entire body. Even the pores of your skin are filled with the syllables of the mantra. Think that all mental darkness is thus dispelled and that the light of wisdom shines ever brighter. From this continuously circling string of mantras issues forth an endless swarm of wisdom bees together with rays of light spreading in the ten directions. They gather the blessings of all the buddhas, bodhisattvas, and sublime gurus from the ten directions, the wisdom of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and the powers of all ordinary beings. All this is absorbed through the top of your head, so that your body is blessed with pristine wisdom. Again light radiates, gathering the essence of the three collections of the Buddha's teaching, the knowledge of the paṇḍitas learned in the five fields of knowledge, the abilities of the spiritual teachers, and the potency of all medicines. All this is absorbed into your tongue, so that your speech is blessed with power. Light radiates again, gathering the vital essence of all plants and trees, the light of the sun and the moon, and the brilliance of the jewels found in the ocean, invoking the wisdom and power of the gods, nāgas, planets, and stars, as well as the minds of the sovereigns and rulers. All this is absorbed into your heart, so that your mind is blessed with the pristine wisdom of nondual bliss and emptiness. While maintaining this visualization, recite the mantra as much as possible: OṂ HRĪḤ DHĪḤ MAME DĪPAṂ MAÑJUŚRĪ MŪṂ HRĪḤ PRAJÑĀVARDHANI HRĪḤ DHĪḤ SVĀHĀ At the end, stabilize the power of the mantra by reciting the vowels and consonants and the essence of dependent arising. Conclusion To conclude, pray: "Lord Mañjughoṣa, grant your blessing so that all the darkness of ignorance of myself and all sentient beings be dispelled and that the special wisdom of selflessness may be born in our mindstreams." Light radiates from the seed syllable at your heart, melting all the worlds and beings of the three realms into light. The light is absorbed into you, you dissolve into the wheel at your heart, the wheel dissolves into the sword, the sword dissolves into the DHĪḤ, and the DHĪḤ transforms into a red bindu, which then melts into light. As all appearances dissolve into the experience of vivid redness, think that you have thus gained mastery over all worldly and transmundane siddhis. Rest your mind in the state of luminous emptiness. When you arise from this state, you instantly appear in the form of Lord Mañjughoṣa. Conclude with this prayer: By this virtue, may I swiftly Accomplish the state of Mañjuśrī and his consort, [And lead all beings to their level, Leaving not a single one behind.] Make other prayers of dedication and aspiration, and then engage in the practice of daily conduct. In between sessions, bless the torma made of whatever substance is available to you, invite the jñānasattva, and offer the torma with the root mantra, to which is added IDAṂ BALIṂTA KHA KHA KHĀHI KHĀHI. Then make offerings, sing praises, and recite prayers. When you go to sleep, sleep in the state of luminous emptiness. When you wake up, imagine that from empty space an assembly of countless Sarasvatīs call you with the mantra DHĪḤ HRĪḤ, and you arise with the illusory body of the deity. For the practice of approach, follow the guidelines for cleanliness and recite 400,000 mantras, plus the supplementary amount, at a rate of three or four sessions a day. Alternatively, you may persist in your recitation until you see the signs described in the texts, either in your waking life or in your dreams. The fire offering for the supplementary mantra recitation, the accomplishment of the pills to enhance the effect of the practice, and the vast activities to benefit oneself and others should be learned directly from the ancient root texts and their commentaries. As a temporary result of applying yourself in this practice, boundless wisdom will be born and you will obtain supernatural knowledge and inconceivable gateways of meditative concentration and dhāraṇīs. The ultimate result of this is the attainment of perfect awakening in the form of the wisdom being Ārya Mañjuśrī. This is certain. Having placed the crown jewel-like command of the All-Seeing Tulku Rinpoche Karma Ngedön Wangpo on my head, I, the learned monk Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, composed this brief essence sādhana of Mañjuśrī Vādisiṃha exactly in accordance with the intent of the ancient root texts of oral instructions by Dampa Sangye, the guide of the supreme siddhas. May the merit of this composition be the cause for all beings to quickly attain the state of the hero Mañjuśrī. Sarvadā kalyāṇaṃ bhavatu! 
